By Josh Catone
2009-07-11 11:46:23 UTC
As long as there has been email and Usenet, funny things have spread virally across the Internet.  But with the rise of YouTube and other social video sharing sites, we're now getting funny videos passed around on a regular basis.  YouTube and sites like it have enabled a sort of global, crowdsourced version of "America's Funniest Home Videos" to take place around the clock, making stars out of anyone who happens to get caught on camera doing something silly.
Some videos have had more staying power than others, and below we've hand-picked what we believe to be 10 of the most unforgettably funny viral videos of all time. If you have any other viral comedy videos you could add to the list, please share them with everyone in the comments.
Top 10 Funny Videos on YouTube
1. Numa Numa
Ah, there’s something about Gary Brolsma’s break-out web cam performance lip syncing and dancing to Moldovan pop music that one just can’t turn away from. Numa Numa was an instant viral hit when it was released and it has been viewed over 30 million times on YouTube alone (not counting duplicates).
2. Star Wars Kid
While the star of this video claims that it ruined his life, it’s hard not to chuckle at the Star Wars kid and his passionate Jedi moves. The clip was an undeniable viral sensation, prompting numerous remixes, including the one next that impressively adds glowing lightsaber special effects.
2. Super Star Wars (Kid) Remix
3. Evolution of Dance
Judson Laipply’s comedic interpretive dance classic the “Evolution of Dance” is one of the few videos on YouTube in the exclusive 100 million views club. The video still gets comments round the clock.
4. William Hung
William Hung was the original terrible singer on “American Idol.” His ear melting performance of “She Bangs” by Ricky Martin truly opened the door for hundreds of other people who can’t sing to audition for the show, and it brought him a whirlwind 15 minutes of fame that had videos of his singing popping up and being remixed all over the Internet.
5. Dramatic Prairie Dog
Yes, it is only 5 seconds, but it is 5 seconds of some of the best prairie dog acting every caught on film… er, or something like that. Honestly, the dramatic prairie dog is one of the most amusing, if shortest, video clips in web history, and one that has been viewed millions of times and remixed over and over again.
6. Star Wars According to a 3 Year Old
Star Wars summarized by an adorable 3 year old girl is one of the cutest and most hilarious things you’ll ever watch. Guaranteed. Just remember: “the shiny guy always worries.”
7. Cat Talking (Translation)
Brilliantly edited, this is actually a remix of a previous viral video that caught two cats apparently engrossed in conversation. This is what they’re saying if your cat-to-English translator is switched on, but also check out the equally hilarious original next.
7. Cat Talking (Original)
8. Sneezing Baby Panda
One of the most popular animal videos of all time, the sneezing baby panda proves two things: baby bears are cute, and baby bears with the sniffles are adorably hilarious. The mother panda’s surprised reaction to her baby’s olfactory explosion is really what gives this video staying power, though.
9. Serious Baby
Cute babies doing even cuter things — they’re YouTube comedy gold. This one of a baby who alternates (seemingly when asked) between an ultra serious expression and fits of giggling made its way to YouTube in 2007 and has since racked up tens of millions of views. Of course, if you’re tickled by baby laughs, the “Hahaha” kid is still the master.
10. Chocolate Rain
It’s doubtful that Tay Zonday ever meant for his song “Chocolate Rain” to be labeled a comedy — and actually, it’s not a bad song — but the combination of his unexpectedly deep voice, goofy movements, and at times bizarre lyrics make it hard not to laugh while watching this one. Still, whatever the reason, “Chocolate Rain” is a bonafide viral video smash hit.
BONUS: Shining Spoof (Trailer)
Unlike the rest of the clips on this list, this one was actually produced and edited with the intention of making a joke and getting laughs. Still, there are numerous fake or fan-made video trailers on YouTube, and this one, which re-imagines the classic Stephen King horror flick The Shining as a light-hearted comedy, is brilliantly done. (Equally well-done is the fan-made Mary Poppins trailer that turns the classic kids film into a horror movie.)
What are your favorite viral comedy video clips?  Share them in the comments.
