American Association of Feline Practitioners
Veterinary professionals passionate about the care of cats
×
Cat Owner Videos
Educational Videos for Cat Owners 
Below is a list of videos that have been created to help cat owners understand the importance of routine veterinary care and how Cat Friendly Practices® (CFP) can help their cats. The series offers a glimpse into how CFPs are able to provide the highest quality-of-care while showing owners a commitment to address the distinct health needs and special considerations of feline patients. To view the entire YouTube playlist,  click here .
The 3-part series includes:
 
1. Cat Friendly Practices® Can Reduce Stress of Vet Visits
This video kicks off a 3-part series about the Cat Friendly Practice® (CFP) Program with a brief overview that educates cat owners on how CFPs can benefit their cats by providing a high quality-of-care, as well as some tips to reduce stress at the veterinary practice.  For more information or to find a CFP by you, please visit www.catvets.com/cfp .
2. Why do Cats Need Routine Veterinary Checkups
This video discusses what veterinarians do during a yearly veterinary checkup. During physical examinations, veterinarians can often detect conditions that may affect your cat's health long before they become significant so they can be managed or cured before they become painful or more costly. CFPs provide many beneficial services beyond just treating a cat when they are sick or for emergency visits.  For information on caring for your cats, visit www.catvets.com/cat-owners/caring-for-cats and to find a CFP by you, please visit www.catvets.com/cfp .
3. A Cat Friendly Practice® Helps Me and My Cats
This video concludes AAFP's 3-part series for cat owners with a testimonial from an owner who brings her cats to a CFP. She describes how a Cat Friendly Practice® has provided great benefits to her cats, as well as how regular veterinary visits have helped her cats live longer due to the fact that her veterinarian was able to detect an illness or condition before it was life-threatening. For more information, or to find a CFP by you, please visit www.catvets.com/cfp .
 
