Please contact us at Rights@LittleThings.com
Top 10 Funny Cat Videos That Went Viral
Advertisement
Ariane is a freelance writer for LittleThings.
Watching funny cat videos has become a national pastime. Ask anyone if they have ever indulged in a funny cat video or two and chances are you will get an answer in the affirmative. In fact, there are even gatherings of thousands of people at yearly internet cat video festivals .
Why this funny-cat-video phenomena? There are recent studies that prove that watching funny cat videos is actually really good for you , in addition to just being a crazy amount of fun. Research shows that binge-watching some really funny cat videos results in a reduction of stress, a boost in energy levels, and an increase in feelings of happiness and well-being. The results are so impressive that they are even considering using funny cat videos as therapy, to which I reply, "Yes, please!"
I think this is all the excuse that I and my fellow funny-cat-video lovers need to sit back, relax, and indulge in a collection of the most hilarious viral cat videos.
10. Ginger Cat Snuggles Her Daddy To Wake Him Up, But Then Her Eyes Droop
This ginger cat learns firsthand that naps can be contagious. The cat begins by attempting to wake up her sleeping owner with some kitty snuggles and stretching, but she quickly gets tired out herself. You will not want to miss this adorable cat video!
9. Lazy Cat Turns Body Into Slinky To Get Down The Stairs
Sometimes you want to be downstairs, but the effort to walk down the stairs is just too much. I totally get it, and I wish that I could be as clever as this lazy cat the next time I can't muster up the energy to go down a flight of stairs.
8. Sneaky Cat Opens Drawer to Pull Out Favorite Toy
Cats have proven time and again to be incredibly clever and industrious. Bars the Maine coon doesn't need his owner to get his favorite toy — he can help himself just fine, thank you! You can't help but be impressed with his stealth and his moves in this funny cat video.
7. Cat Scales A Rock Wall Like A Pro
I knew that cats were excellent climbers, but I have never seen one quite as skilled as Lala the rock-wall-climbing cat. She scopes out her route like a pro and leaps deftly from one tiny ledge to the other. This feline feat is not one to be missed!
