Please contact us at Rights@LittleThings.com
Top 10 Funny Dog Videos That Went Viral
Advertisement
Ariane is a freelance writer for LittleThings.
For centuries, the dog has been known as man's best friend. And if you have spent any time with a friendly pup, it isn't hard to understand why! Dogs delight us, love us unconditionally and with total abandon, and they know exactly how to keep a smile on our faces and laughter in our mouths.
Getting to spend time with a dog has proven to be therapeutic and stress-relieving. It is also known to have other health benefits . Laughter, for example, has also been proven to be very healthy, even essential to our well-being.
Unfortunately, many of us do not laugh enough on a daily basis, or get to spend nearly as much time as we'd like with the dogs that we love. So, we are bringing you 10 of the funniest dog videos for you to enjoy wherever you may be. These funny dog videos are sure to give you a quick puppy-fix, and maybe even elicit a belly laugh or two.
So kick back, relax, and enjoy our top 10 list of funny dog videos that went viral. You can think of it as an investment in your health.
10. Hilarious Husky Swims Like A Shark
This funny husky named Grayson likes to beat the summer heat by cruising around in the family swimming pool. It's a good thing he enjoys the pool and not the beach, because he might just cause a shark scare the way he glides across the surface of the water, snapping his jaws in an uncanny, unintentional shark impersonation!
9. Funny Dog Snitches On Guilty Sibling
One of the dogs in this sibling duo snatched a cookie off of the counter and ate it, but which one is the guilty culprit? Will the innocent sibling spill the crumbs on her brother? You better believe she will! Watch what happens in this hilarious whodunit.
8. Dog Tricks Owner Into Building A Short Fence
Stella's owner plans to build a fence to keep her in the backyard, so he systematically tests to see how high she can jump, and then adds 6 inches. Sounds pretty smart, right? Well, watch what Stella does exactly 13 seconds after her owner completes the new fence.
